staging-new-tutorial-content (#452)
metanorma/metanorma.org: tutorials/review.adoc

Let’s explore the workflow of Metanorma in the next lesson.
>> Start next lesson //Button text

=== The Metanorma Workflow

include::../author/concepts/metanorma_workflow.adoc[]

Let’s look at the core of each standard document: Metanorma AsciiDoc.
>> Start next lesson //Button text

=== Summary

Let’s recap what we’ve learned so far:

* Metanorma uses a what you see is what you mean (WYSIWYM) approach, meaning that the text you write is what you *want* to see.
* You need to render documents to have a correct visible output. The appearance is controlled in a stylesheet.
* Metanorma is an umbrella term for several things and consists of: +
The metanorma toolchain, document models and a XML schema of these document models.
* Metanorma documents use Metanorma AsciiDoc markup 
* When you want to generate an output, the AsciiDoc document is converted into XML in order to be checked against the XML schema.
* If the document is valid, Metanorma generates an HTML, PDF and Microsoft Word (`.doc`) output. 

Now that we have covered the fundamentals, let’s have a look at AsciiDoc.
>> Start next lesson

== Introduction to AsciiDoc

tag::[learningobjectives-2]

> Before we write our first Metanorma document, let us look at the foundation for all Metanorma documents: AsciiDoc. In this lesson, we will discuss what AsciiDoc is and what a typical Metanorma document looks like. You will also learn how to write AsciiDoc.

Reviewer: Maybe we should mention footnotes (and footnote blocks) in Introduction to AsciiDoc?

> Before we write our first Metanorma document, let us look at the foundation for all Metanorma documents: AsciiDoc. In this lesson, we will discuss what AsciiDoc is and what a typical Metanorma document looks like. You will also learn how to write AsciiDoc.

Author: @anermina  Thank you, I'll include footnotes :)

end::[learningobjectives-2]

> Each Metanorma document is written in AsciiDoc, a markup language that annotates text with processing instructions for layout. Since AsciiDoc only consists of text, you can use any editor to create AsciiDoc files (`.adoc` files). Because Metanorma fulfills the markup requirements of SDOs, Metanorma extends plain AsciiDoc. This version of AsciiDoc is called Metanorma AsciiDoc. 

Author: ```suggestion
Each Metanorma document is written in AsciiDoc, a markup language that annotates text with processing instructions for layout. Since AsciiDoc only consists of text, you can use any editor to create AsciiDoc files (`.adoc` files). AsciiDoc is very similar to Markdown or Wiki formatting but provides more precise markup for creating text documents, for example to create a bibliography section or an index.

Because Metanorma fulfills the markup requirements of SDOs, Metanorma extends plain AsciiDoc. This version of AsciiDoc is called Metanorma AsciiDoc. 
```

An AsciiDoc document consists of different levels of granularity:

> * The document head (also called the preamble)

Author: Thank you for the clarification!

<4> `:doctype:` defines the type of document, for example standard, report, guide, etc.
<5> `:mn-document-class:` indicates the Metanorma flavor the document should be checked against. 
<6> The committee responsible for the document
<7> The author’s name. You can add co-authors by appending the attribute with a number:  `_2`, `_3`, and so on. 
<8> When you add an address that contains multiple lines, end each line except for the last with `+ \`. Alternatively, you can enter each line into its own attribute, such as `:street:`, `:postcode:`, `:city:`, `:country:`. 

[[exercise-2-1]]
include::exercises.adoc[tag=exercise-2-1]

Let’s add some sections to our document in the next lesson.
>> Start next lesson 

=== Sections

Sections define hierarchy levels in your document and are equivalent to chapters. The document title is the highest section and is created by prepending a `=` sign in front of the heading. If you want to go one level deeper in the hierarchy, add another `=`. 
Here’s an example: 

[source, AsciiDoc]
----
= Document title
== Section 1
=== Section 1.1
==== Section 1.1.1
===== Section 1.1.1.1
== Section 2
…
----

> Metanorma provides a document model that determines what sections need to appear in a document. Let’s have a look at the standard document model (standoc) to understand what kinds of sections appear in a typical Metanorma document.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Metanorma provides a document model that determines what sections need to appear in a document. Let’s have a look at the standard document model (standoc) to understand what kinds of sections appear in a typical Metanorma document.

NOTE: the standoc flavour does not correspond to any one SDO: it is a default model that other flavours are based on.
```

.A UML representation of all section classes in Metanorma
image::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/metanorma/metanorma-model-standoc/master/images/StandardDoc_Sections.png[A UML representation of all section classes in Metanorma]

A typical Metanorma document can contain the following sections:

* Abstract
* Foreword
* Introduction
* Acknowledgments
* Scope
* Terminology 
* Definitions
* Clauses 
* Bibliography
* Annex

NOTE: Each organization is based on the standard document model but they can omit sections or make them mandatory, if they choose to. For example, only NIST uses the acknowledgments section, whereas other SDOs do not require it. Check the https://www.metanorma.org/flavors/[flavor documentation] for more details on how your SDO uses Metanorma. 

> To successfully validate a document, the compiler needs to know what sections are in the document. Most of the time, the section headings match sections defined in the document model. However, not all sections need an identifier, for example, your ordinary content sections as they fall under the category of `clause section`, and are not further standardized

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To successfully validate a document, the compiler needs to know what sections are in the document. Most of the time, the section headings match sections defined in the document model. However, not all sections need an identifier, for example, your ordinary content sections fall under the category of `clause section`, and are not further standardized.
```

If you want to use a different title or create a document in a language other than English, you need to add metadata in square brackets to ensure that sections are recognized. Plain AsciiDoc already provides some https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/sections/section-ref/#section-styles[section metadata] that Metanorma uses for document validation: 

* `[abstract]`
* `[acknowledgments]`
* `[appendix]`
* `[bibliography]`
* `[index]`
* `[preface]`

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Of these, documents are only expected to contain one Abstract, one Acknowledgements section, and one Index (currently). On the other hand, documents can have any number of appendixes (or annexes), bibliographies, and prefatory sections, each of them marked with those attributes.
```

> There are also some Metanorma-specific section identifiers:

Author: ```suggestion
There are also some Metanorma-specific section identifiers, that follow the syntax `[heading=section]`:
```

> * `[terms and definitions]`

Reviewer 2: No no no. If you want anything outside of the Asciidoc defaults, you have to use the syntax `[heading=terms and definitions]`.  A style attribute like that will not be recognised.

> * `[terms and definitions]`

Author: ```suggestion
* `[heading=terms and definitions]`
```

> * *Any more?* 

Reviewer 2: Yeah, "Scope" (applicable to ISO), "Symbols and abbreviated terms", "Introduction", "Foreword". Again, these need to be given as `heading=`

> * *Any more?* 

Author: ```suggestion
* [heading=foreword]
* [heading=introduction]
* [heading=scope]
* [heading=symbols and abbreviated terms]

```

[source, AsciiDoc]
----
= Document title

== Abstract

== Foreword

[preface] <1>
== Introduction to version 3 of this standard

[bibliography] <2>
== Normative references

[heading=terms and definitions] <3>
== Terms, definitions, and abbreviations

[bibliography]
== Bibliography
	...
[appendix,obligation=informative] <4>
== Annex
	...
----

<1> This section is an introduction but the compiler can not recognize it because it deviates from plain `== Introduction`. The `preface` attribute ensures that the document structure is still valid.
<2> The `Normative references` section contains references to related standards. The compiler needs the `[bibliography]` tag, so that it renders the reference correctly.

> <3> An alternative way to assign a section identifier is use the `heading` tag. 

Reviewer 2: Necessary for section types not anticipated by Asciidoctor; reword accordingly.

> <3> An alternative way to assign a section identifier is use the `heading` tag. 

Author: ```suggestion
<3> Use the `heading` tag to assign section types specific to Metanorma.
```

<4> Here, the appendix is called “Annex”, and needs the `appendix` tag to define what kind of section it is. You can specify if a section is normative or informative by adding the `obligation` identifier after the section identifier. 

[[exercise-2-2]]
include::exercises.adoc[tag=exercise-2-2]

We’ve built the basic structure of a Metanorma document. Let’s add some content to our document in the next lesson.
>> Start next lesson 

=== Blocks

Information that forms a logical segment, such as a paragraph or a list, is called a block.

> A block starts and ends with a https://asciidoctor.org/docs/asciidoc-writers-guide/#delimited-blocks[delimiter] which is a sequence of characters. The delimiters tell the compiler that the following input belongs together. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most blocks start and end with a https://asciidoctor.org/docs/asciidoc-writers-guide/#delimited-blocks[delimiter] which is a matching sequence of characters. The delimiters tell the compiler that the text they contain belongs together. 
```

.Examples for different blocks
[source, AsciiDoc]
------
I’m a paragraph and I don’t need a block delimiter. 
<1>
. I’m a list item and also do not need a delimiter
. I’m the second list item
. I'm list item number three

//// <2>
I’m a comment.
////

[source, python] <3>
----
print("Hello World!")
----
------

<1> Paragraphs and lists are types of blocks that do not need any delimiters. They are separated by a blank line in between blocks.
<2> Comments use four slashes as a delimiter `////`. No other block uses slashes to begin and end a block.
<3> All other types of blocks rely on delimiters, such as four dashes `----` or four equal signs `====`. This block contains a code sample written in python.

> Apart from the blocks shown in the example, there are many types of blocks in AsciiDoc, such as:

Author: ```suggestion
There are many types of blocks in AsciiDoc, such as:
```

* Paragraphs

> * Lists

Reviewer 2: You've mentioned these two and code samples. Remove, or remove the "Apart from".

* Tables

> * Images

Reviewer 2: Add examples, notes, and formulas. They are important in standards, we don't want first time users wondering where they are.

* Admonitions (Note, Caution, Warning, etc.)

> * Code samples

Author: ```suggestion
* Examples
* Code samples
* Mathematic formulas
```

* Term definitions
* Comments
* Reviewer Notes

Let’s look at lists in the next lesson. 
>> Next lesson

==== Lists

Metanorma AsciiDoc supports three types of lists:

* Unordered lists
* Ordered lists
* Definition lists

*Unordered lists*

Unordered lists are bulleted and can be nested. They look like this:

[source, AsciiDoc]
----
The main changes compared to the previous edition are:

* updated normative references;
* deletions:
** deletion of 4.3. [nested list item]
** deletion of 4.4. [nested list item]
----

*Ordered lists* 

> Ordered lists are invoked by beginning the line with a dot `.`. The list items are numbered automatically. The list style depends on the stylesheet of your organization. However, if you want to tweak how your list looks like, you can use an attribute before the list starts, for example:

Reviewer 2: Custom numbering is not supported in all flavours, and I don't want to support it in all flavours. I'd prefer this to be removed.

[source, AsciiDoc]
----
[type="alphabetic_upper"]
. First as "A"
. Second as "B"

[type="roman_upper"]
. First as "I"
. Second as "II"
----

*Definition lists*

> Definition lists are special to Metanorma and are used to define a term.They are often used in a Definitions section in a document, but can appear in other sections as well, *except* for the Terms section. 

Reviewer 2: No, definition lists are standard Asciidoc (although I see they call them Description Lists: https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/lists/description/)

> Definition lists are special to Metanorma and are used to define a term.They are often used in a Definitions section in a document, but can appear in other sections as well, *except* for the Terms section. 

Author: ```suggestion
Definition lists (also called https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/lists/description/[description lists] pair a term and a description together. They are often used in a "Definitions" section to define units or terms. Definition lists can appear in other sections as well, *except* for the Terms section, which provides a special syntax for defining terms. 
```

Definition lists follow the syntax of `term:: Definition`. The following example defines units that are used in the document.

> NOTE: `stem:[w]` declares the greek letter omega and renders it as stem:[w].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NOTE: `stem:[]` is used for mathematical formatting, and results in italics. So `stem:[w]` is an italic w, _w_; `stem:[m_D]` is an italic m with a D subscript: _m~D~_.
```

|===
.2+|Defect 4+^| Maximum permissible mass fraction of defects in husked rice +
stem:[w_max]
| in husked rice | in milled rice (non-glutinous) | in husked parboiled rice | in milled parboiled rice

| Extraneous matter: organic | 1,0 | 0,5 | 1,0 | 0,5
|===

[[exercise-2-5]]
include::exercises.adoc[tag=exercise-2-5]

Let’s look at inserting images next.
>> Start next lesson

==== Images

There are two AsciiDoc image macro types, block and inline. 

*Block image*

A block image is displayed as a discrete element, i.e., on its own line, in a document. A block image is designated by image macro name and followed by two colons (`::`) It’s preceded by a blank line, entered on a line by itself, and then followed by a blank line.

However, in standard documents images don’t just decorate text, but rather show important features. You might want to reference that image in the text, which you need an anchor for. You can also explain a graphic by adding a key. The entries of the key follow the syntax of a definition list (`key::Explanation`).

[source, AsciiDoc]
----
[[figureC-1]] <1>
.Typical gelatinization curve <2>
image::images/rice_image2.png[Image of the gelatinization curve] <3>

> *Key* <4>
> 
> stem:[t_90]:: time required to gelatinize 90 % of the kernels <5>
> P:: point of the curve corresponding to a cooking time of stem:[t_90]

Author: ```suggestion
[%key] <4>
stem:[t_90]:: time required to gelatinize 90 % of the kernels <5>
P:: point of the curve corresponding to a cooking time of stem:[t_90]
```

----
<1> Anchor for references
<2> Image title
<3> Image macro `image::path/file.jpg[alt text]`. If you don’t want to write alt text, you still need to append empty square brackets at the end of the macro. 

> <4> Key beginning

Author: ```suggestion
<4> [%key] indicates that the image has a key.
```

> <4> Key beginning

Author: Fixed it.

<5> Key entries

*Inline image macro* 
//Maybe only discuss in documentation but not in tutorial, as it won't be covered in the exercise?
An inline image is displayed in the flow of another element, such as a paragraph. This is useful when you want to incorporate buttons or other icons into the text flow. 

The inline image macro is almost identical to the block image macro, except its macro name is followed by a single colon (:). For more information refer to the https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/macros/images/[AsciiDoc documentation]. 

[[exercise-2-6]]
include::exercises.adoc[tag=exercise-2-6]

Let’s look at admonitions next.
>> Start next lesson

==== Admonitions

> Admonitions are signal words used to catch the reader’s attention, such as “TIP”, “NOTE”, or “WARNING”. There are two ways to declare an admonition: inline and as a block.

Author: ```suggestion
Admonitions are signal words used to catch the reader’s attention, such as “TIP”, “NOTE”, or “WARNING”. There are two ways to declare an admonition: in a single paragraph and as a block.
```

> *Inline Admonitions*

Author: ```suggestion
*Single-paragraph Admonitions*
```

Start a new line with the signal word in all caps and a colon and write your admonition.

.Example for an inline note
[source, AsciiDoc]
----
NOTE: Advice on when to use which signal word is specified in ANSI Z535.6. 
----

*Block admonitions*

. Start with the signal word in all caps enclosed in square brackets.
. Insert the block delimiter.
. Insert any AsciiDoc markup that you need.
. End the block with a block delimiter.

.Example for a note block.
[source, AsciiDoc]
------
[NOTE] <1>
==== <2>
This is an example of an admonition block. <3>

Unlike an admonition paragraph, it may contain any AsciiDoc content.
The style can be any one of the admonition labels:

* NOTE
* TIP
* WARNING
* CAUTION
* IMPORTANT
==== <4>
------

> 

Author: ```suggestion

Metanorma adds two more signal words: "Safety precautions" and "Danger". Since they are not standard  AsciiDoc functionality, you'll need to mark them with a `type` attribute like this: 

[source, AsciiDoc]
====
[type=danger]
DANGER: Do perform maintenance tasks while the machine is still operating. 
====

```

------
.Sample Code <1>
[source,ruby] <2>
==== <3>
puts "Hello, world." <4>
%w{a b c}.each do |x|
  puts x
end 
==== <5>
------

<1> Title for your code sample (optional)
<2> `[source]` specifies that the block contains code. `ruby` is the coding language. The block will highlight keywords depending on the coding language.
<3> Starting delimiter
<4> Sample code
<5> Ending delimiter

[[exercise-2-8]]
include::exercises.adoc[tag=exercise-2-8]

We’re done with blocks - good job! The next lesson covers inline markup. 
>> Start next lesson

=== Inline Markup

To annotate single words, you use inline markup. The markup encloses the word(s) and you do not need to begin a new line. Inline markup allows you to:

* Emphasize text
* Link to external resources with hyperlinks
* Create internal cross-references
* Create index entries
* Create Bibliographic entries

Let’s look at these features in the following lessons.
>> Start next lesson

==== Text markup

The simplest form of inline markup is to emphasize text. 
AsciiDoc allows you to:

* Make words *bold* using asterisks 
* _Italicise_ words with underscores 
* Apply `monospacing` using backticks

[source, AsciiDoc]
---- 
*bold*
_italic_

> `monospace`

Author: ```suggestion
`monospace`
`^superscript^`
`~subscript~`
```

> ----

Reviewer 2: You could add `^superscript^` and `~subscript~`; technical writers will want those, and they should not need to resort to AsciiMath or LaTeX to get them.

Metanorma extends these simple formats with:

* Strikethrough text ([strike]#strike through text#)
* Smallcaps text ([smallcap]#small caps text#)
* Underline text ([underline]#underline text#)

[source, AsciiDoc]
---- 
[strike]#strike through text#
[smallcap]#small caps text#
[underline]#underline text#
----

Metanorma also supports automatic character replacements, for example the copyright symbol © can be entered using `(C)`. For more information about automatic character replacements, see https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/subs/replacements/[the AsciiDoc documentation]. 

[[exercise-2-9]]
include::exercises.adoc[tag=exercise-2-9]

Let’s look at a more advanced form of inline formatting: index entries
>> Start next lesson

==== Index Terms

> 

Author: ```suggestion

NOTE: Metanorma always processes index terms and creates the corresponding XML. However, not all flavors render an Index section. Check out the https://www.metanorma.org/flavors/[flavor documentation] for your SDO to see if it supports indexing.
```

> Before you define an index term, your document needs a section where the index terms can appear. To create an index, define a level 1 section (==) marked with the style index at the end of your document.

Reviewer 2: Not all flavours support indexes: they will be processed in the XML, but stripped out by default in rendering. Indexing is currently supported in ISO, IETF, and BIPM. Advise readers to check whether their flavour does.

[source, AsciiDoc]
----
[index]
== Index
----
Index entries can consist of up to three levels using a comma to separate the terms. Metanorma provides two options to create an index entry:

* Visible index terms are words within the text that are annotated with an index entry using double parentheses. `\((Level 1 index term))`

> * Hidden index terms are index entries that are not visible in the final output and are generated using triple parentheses. `(\((Level 1 index term, Level 2 index term, Level 3 index term)))`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Hidden index terms are index entries that are not visible in the final output and are generated using triple parentheses. `(\((Level 1 index term, Level 2 index term, Level 3 index term)))`. These allow the index to include optional subterms and sub-subterms; they also allow the index term to differ from what actually appears in the text.
```

Let’s have a look at an example:

[source, AsciiDoc]
----
The Lady of the Lake, her arm clad in the purest shimmering samite,
held aloft Excalibur from the bosom of the water,
signifying by divine providence that I, ((Arthur)), <1>
was to carry Excalibur (((Sword, Broadsword, Excalibur))). <2>
----
<1> `\((Arthur))` will be displayed as `Arthur` in the text and carries a first level index entry
<2> `(\((Sword, Broadsword, Excalibur)))` will not appear in the text, but a three level index entry will be generated.

[[exercise-2-10]]
include::exercises.adoc[tag=exercise-2-10]

In the next lesson, we will cover references and links. 
>> Start next lesson

==== References

References are a core part of standards, because they coexist and relate to other standard documents. There are four types of references:

* Hyperlinks to an external source, for example a link to a website
* Metadata references
* Internal references to a section, image, table, etc.
* Bibliographic entries

*Hyperlinks*

> AsciiDoc lets you include links to external sources by pasting the URL into the document and appending the link text in square brackets `[Link text]`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
AsciiDoc lets you include links to external sources by pasting the URL into the document, and optionally appending the link text in square brackets `[Link text]`. 
```

.Example of a link
[source, AsciiDoc]
----
http://www.iso.org/[International Organization for Standardization].
----

*Metadata references*

Every document contains a set of metadata to describe the document. You can insert a metadata reference by putting the attribute in curly braces `{attribute}`. The reference will be replaced with the value in the rendered output. 

[source, AsciiDoc]
----

> This document was prepared by Technical Committee ISO/TC {technical-committee-number}, _{technical-committee}_, Subcommittee SC {subcommittee-number}, _{subcommittee}_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:technical-committee-number: 2
:technical-committee: Fasteners
:subcommittee-number: 11
:subcommittee: Fasteners with metric external thread

This document was prepared by Technical Committee ISO/TC {technical-committee-number}, _{technical-committee}_, Subcommittee SC {subcommittee-number}, _{subcommittee}_.
```

----

*Internal references*

> To link to an important place in your document, you need to set an anchor using double square brackets `[[anchor]]`. Metanorma automatically numbers and names these references. Since the markup will be converted into XML, the anchor must follow the https://www.w3.org/TR/xml-names11/[XML namespace conventions]. Therefore, an anchor name name must not contain: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To link to an important place in your document, you need to set an anchor using double square brackets `[[anchor]]`. Metanorma automatically numbers and names these references; because they are autonumbered, they will be renumbered automatically if you insert any new text of the same type. Since the markup will be converted into XML, the anchor must follow the https://www.w3.org/TR/xml-names11/[XML namespace conventions]. Therefore, an anchor name name must not contain: 
```

----
[[figureC-1]]
.Typical gelatinization curve 
image::images/rice_image2.png[Image of the gelatinization curve] 
----

image::../assets/author/tutorials/references_img_anchor.jpg[]

To reference an anchor, type the anchor name like this `<<anchor>>`.
[source, AsciiDoc]
----
 <<figureC-1>> gives an example of a typical gelatinization curve.
----

image::../assets/author/tutorials/references_img_target.jpg[]

If you want to display text other than the anchor text, you just have to append the text inside the brackets using a comma.
 
[source, AsciiDoc]
----
 <<figureC-1, The diagram>> gives an example of a typical gelatinization curve.
----

*Bibliographic entries*

In standard documents typically there are two types of references, namely the “normative references” and the “bibliography” (informative references).
Every bibliographic section must be preceded by the style attribute `[bibliography]` so that bibliographic references are recognized as such. 

A reference entry is usually part of an unordered list (`*`). The bibliographic entry is enclosed in triple square brackets (`[[[]]]`) and contains:

. The anchor name used to reference this entry
. A document identifier

> After the reference, you include the reference text in italics, for example the title of the document.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the reference, you may include the reference text in italics, for example the title of the document. If the document identifier is recognised by Metanorma, however, its bibliographic description is fetched automatically from the SDO web site, and will overwrite any title you provide with the authoritative title of the reference.
```

----
* [[[anchor,document identifier or reference tag]]], _reference list text_
----

.Example for a bibliography section
[source, AsciiDoc]
----
[bibliography]
== Normative references

* [[[ISO20483,ISO 20483:2013]]], _Cereals and cereal products -- Determination of moisture content -- Reference method_
* [[[ISO6540,ISO 6540:1980]]]. _Maize -- Determination of moisture content (on milled grains and on whole grains)_
----
Gets rendered as:
* ISO 20483:2013. _Cereals and cereal products — Determination of moisture content — Reference method_
* ISO 6540:1980. _Maize — Determination of moisture content (on milled grains and on whole grains)_

To cite an entry from your bibliography you type the anchor name like this `<<ISO20483>>`.
If you want to specify a location within the cited document, you can add https://www.metanorma.org/author/topics/document-format/bibliography/#localities[localities] in the brackets like so: `<<ISO20483, part=IV,chapter=3,paragraph=12>>`.

[[exercise-2-11]]
include::exercises.adoc[tag=exercise-2-11]

Let’s summarize what we’ve learnt so far.
>> Start next lesson

=== Summary

We’ve covered a lot of ground, so here is a quick summary for you:

> * Each Metanorma document contains metadata in the preamble using the colon notation `:attribute:`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Each Metanorma document contains metadata in the header using the colon notation `:attribute:`.
```

* A Metanorma document consists of several predefined sections. The document model of your organization dictates which are optional and which are mandatory. Sections are invoked using equal signs `=`.
* Blocks are entities that belong together, such as paragraphs, lists, tables, etc. Paragraphs and lists do not need to be marked by delimiters. The remaining block types begin and end with a delimiter, for example four dashes `----`.
* Inline markup is used for text formatting and references. You can reference:
** an external source (`URL[Link text]`) 
** Metadata (`{attribute}`)
** Places in the document by setting an anchor (`[[anchor-id]]`) and referencing the anchor (`<<anchor-id>>`)
** Bibliographic entries + 
[source, AsciiDoc]
----
* [[[anchor,document identifier or reference tag]]], _reference list text_
<<anchor>>
----

You did a great job so far! Let’s talk about reviewing documents in the next lesson. 
>> Start next lesson

> == Reviewing Metanorma Documents

Reviewer 2: I am worried about this, because the associated code is immature, and we have never fixed the HTML rendering of comments in 3 years to allow interactive comments. @ronaldtse's call on whether this is included in the tutorial, but I think we shouldn't.

[source, shell]
----
metanorma document.adoc
----
With this command you trigger the metanorma toolchain to:

* Read the AsciiDoc input
* Convert it into XML
* Check the XML against the document model (XML schema)
* Create HTML, PDF, and DOC output

You can also manipulate the way Metanorma compiles a document by setting flags. Flags are appended to the build command, like this:  

.Example of a build command with a flag
[source, shell]
----
metanorma document.adoc -x html
----

You can use the following flags to manipulate the building process:

* `-t`: Sets the flavor of the document +
NOTE: Either define the flavor in the metadata using `mn-document-class` or use `-t flavor`
* `-x`: Sets the output format(s) of the document 
* `-o`: Enter a path that the output should be saved to. 

To see the full list of possible build commands, open the metanorma help on the command line.

[source, shell]
----
metanorma help compile
----

>> Start next lesson

=== Troubleshooting 

There can be many reasons why you can’t compile a Metanorma AsciiDoc document into the final output, but you can easily fix them when you know what typical errors occur and how to fix them. 

> Metanorma tells you what’s wrong in the terminal and stores all errors in an Error file `.err` where your original document is stored. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Metanorma tells you what’s wrong in the terminal and stores all errors in an Error file `.err` where your original document is stored. If execution has aborted before the XML content could be finalised, the XML file is still output to disk, suffixed with `.xml.abort` rather than `.xml`, and you can use it to make sense of error messages.
```

////
Your input needed!
What are the most common errors when compiling a document and how they are caused?
How to resolve the errors?

> 

Reviewer 2: Generalities from me:

* Break document into bits and compile them, so you can narrow down the error location. 
* Recompile the document incrementally as you go while authoring it, so you can detect errors early and pin them down to recent additions. 
* Document outright crashes, because of error in markup. Validation errors start looking strange after a particular line number. Bug crash reports that execution failed in processing  a particular kind of content. 
* Document looks odd when rendered. Look through the document to see how; for example, incorrect number of `==` before a section title will result in wrong numbering of clauses. Sections can outright disappear if they are not where Metanorma expects to find them.
* Typos in references will result in XML crashes mentioning `IDREF` (the XML for a cross-reference within an XML file). Mentions of anchors have to be letter-perfect.
* Details of XML errors can be ignored in a first pass, and Metanorma is more pedantic about structure than SDOs usually are. However Style errors, expressed as text (e.g. about how to express references to normative text, or how to represent numbers), do correspond to rules set by the SDOs.

Reviewer: @kickoke Sorry for waiting for my review. I still have a few things left to check (and try to remind myself about the issues I've had so far), so I'll add further comments tomorrow, if any.

For now, in addition to @opoudjis's comments, I'd like to add following:

- Make sure all gems are installed and up-to-date. In case gems are not installed, you will probably get an error such as: "Run `bundle install` to install missing gems." which will guide you to their installation, but it is also good to update them every once in a while even without getting such an error.

- It is a good practice to divide document into sections. You can then compile each section separately, or compile several of them in order to locate the error easier. For example, if you assume there could be some error in Foreword section and therefore want to exclude it from being rendered, you can easily add a delimiter for inline comment before the line which includes that section: `//include::sections/00-foreword.adoc[]`.

- In case there is some unrecognized cross-reference, make sure you are always using the same keyword for one reference.

- If document looks odd from one point onwards, you should probably check if you have added starting and ending delimiters for all block elements (such as table block, example block, source block, etc.) properly. If not, you will most probably receive some error message which points to the issue. For example: "unterminated example block", "table missing leading separator" or "unterminated table block".
In case when document contains source text from some point onwards, many errors and warnings can be shown in the terminal, especially regarding references and cross-references. Therefore, it is always good to see the actual output document before starting troubleshooting based on to the errors shown in the terminal.

- There are some mandatory document attributes for each flavor. Make sure you use them in your .adoc input. However, if you forget to add some of them, or if you use some unrecognized value for any of them, Metanorma will either automatically correct that error and inform you about it, or it will point which attribute should be added or changed.

- In case some figure cannot be loaded, make sure you added it to the correct path, indicated by `:imagesdir:` document attribute, or in the command for adding the figure itself. Also make sure that you wrote a correct extension.

- If you see some index term showing up multiple times when it should appear only once, you should check the parentheses used in index entries for that term.

Author: Thank you @anermina and @opoudjis for the input. 
I'll craft a text and let you know once it's ready for review.
